==============================
PyWavelets 1.2.0 Release Notes
==============================

.. contents::

We are very pleased to announce the release of PyWavelets 1.2.

This release has new discrete wavelet transforms features incleading a series
of multiresolution analysis functions (details below).

PyWavelets has dropped support for Python 3.5 and 3.6 and now supports
Python 3.7-3.10.

We also now provide aarch64 linux wheels as well as universal2 and arm64
wheels that are compatible with Apple's M1 processors.


New features
============

- There is a new series of multilevel stationary wavelet transforms (``mra``,
  ``mra2`` and ``mran``) suited for multiresolution analysis of 1D, 2D or nD
  signals, respectively. This MRA analysis is also known as the additive
  wavelet decomposition because the corresponding inverse functions
  (``imra``, ``imra2`` or ``imran``) reconstruct the original signal by
  simple addition of the components. These are a good alternative to the use
  of the existing SWT functions when it is important to have features aligned
  across wavelet scales (see the new demo in ``demo/mra_vs_swt.py``).

- There is now an n-dimensional implementation available for the wavelet packet
  transforms (see class `WaveletPacketND`).


Backwards incompatible changes
==============================

- The image returned by ``pywt.data.camera`` has been replaced by a similar,
  CC0-licensed image because the original image was determined to only be
  licensed for non-commercial use. Any users who still need the prior camera
  image for non-commercial use can find it many places online by performing a
  web search for "cameraman test image".

Bugs Fixed
==========

- Add input length check in `dwt_single` for reflect modes.
- Demos were updated for compatibility with recent Matplotlib versions.
- Removed deprecated import from ``imp``.

Other changes
=============

- PyWavelets has dropped support for Python 3.5 and 3.6 in this release.

Authors
=======

* ElConno +
* Ralf Gommers
* Gregory R. Lee
* Jakub Mandula +
* nperraud +
* ossdev07 +

A total of 6 people contributed to this release.
People with a "+" by their names contributed a patch for the first time.
This list of names is automatically generated, and may not be fully complete.


Issues closed for v1.2
----------------------

* `#235 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/issues/235>`__: Build issue: cython not recognized
* `#545 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/issues/545>`__: Request: add __reduce__ method for WaveletPacket object
* `#554 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/issues/554>`__: imp is deprecated


Pull requests for v1.2
----------------------

* `#393 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/393>`__: Wavelet packets: extend to nD and support subsets of the axes
* `#525 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/525>`__: WIP: test against Python 3.8
* `#527 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/527>`__: Multiresolution Analysis
* `#540 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/540>`__: remove unused distutils import from __init__.py
* `#546 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/546>`__: ENH: make Wavelet, WaveletPacket, WaveletPacket2D and ContinuousWavelet...
* `#547 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/547>`__: ContinuousWavelet: add tests for dtype and remove unused \*\*kwargs
* `#552 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/552>`__: Cython 3.0 compatibility: explicitly call import_array()
* `#559 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/559>`__: MAINT: bump minimum Python version to 3.7
* `#567 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/567>`__: Documentation about trim_approx in swt2 is wrong
* `#571 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/571>`__: improve documentation of padding in coeffs_to_array
* `#572 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/572>`__: Replace camera image with a CC0-licensed equivalent
* `#573 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/573>`__: switch from terrify to multibuild for OS X setup on Travis
* `#578 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/578>`__: Add Python 3.9 to CI and classifiers
* `#584 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/584>`__: MAINT: remove use of deprecated np.int/float aliases
* `#598 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/598>`__: Add input length check in dwt_single for reflect modes
* `#601 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/601>`__: Add wheel building and deployment via GitHub Actions and cibuildwheel
* `#604 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/604>`__: MAINT: update pyproject.toml and setup.py for Python 3.10
* `#608 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/608>`__: BLD: update Cython build dependency to recent release and <3.0
* `#609 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/609>`__: MAINT: fix \`origin='image'\` calls that Matplotlib no longer...
* `#610 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/610>`__: Update GitHub Actions workflow to build Python 3.10 wheels
* `#611 <https://github.com/PyWavelets/pywt/pull/611>`__: MAINT: fix doc build issues

